title: 'La Fortuna, Costa Rica'
subtitle: ''
date: 2016-03-08
pages: 3
page: 2
---

So the first day in Arenal ends with Paul being annoyed that not only do I still have my hacking cough but that I have terrible sunburn all down my back, in a place where we are meant to be going to the hot springs. Paul pronounces that we “really should be healthier”. Famous last words. In the middle of the night it becomes apparent that he really isn’t “healthy”. The less said about that night the better.

## Eco Terra Birdwatching at Arenal Hanging Bridges

So for the rest of this bit I get control of the blog. At half five I am there for my pick up, a birdwatching tour at the Arenal Hanging Bridges, minimum two people. I explain to my guide that Paul isn’t coming and it’s soon apparent that it’s just me on this tour! I meet Jason my guide and Yeudy the driver and head off towards the hanging bridges.

### Spotting birds on route

Before we arrive there’s spotting to do; we see two [white throated magpie-jays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White-throated_magpie-jay) sitting on power lines, and they're rare to see in this area; Jason was excited, it means their distribution is widening and it's quite an achievement to see two, one with a crest and one without. My first thought was that it’s the difference between male and female, but apparently both should have this crest; this individual must have lost theirs somehow. I was too sleepy to get the camera out in time.

We move on and very soon we are stopping again to spot a [black mandibled toucan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black-mandibled_toucan), who moves just a fraction too early before I can get a picture. Jason explains that it’s much easier to see toucans out in the open than in the forest, and indeed that was my only toucan spotting during the tour. We also see vultures, and I learn about the differences between black vultures, turkey vultures and king vultures. Jason explains that experienced birders often miss the king vultures as they don’t realise that groups of vultures can be mixed species, so they assume that if one is a black vulture they all are. The [king vulture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/King_vulture) is around more than most people imagine, although has a far more limited distribution in Costa Rica. The view from below watching them fly is mainly white feathers with a black body, rather similar to the Turkey Vulture, the critical difference is the yellow head of the King and the red head of the Turkey. Seeing the black vulture is easier, with their black wings and white tips.

We stopped again a few more times – looking at creatures both Jason and Yeudy the driver had seen. Yeudy is an especially good spotter, a natural.

### Birds in the car park and at the entrance

It's still early when we arrive and at 6am we’re the only ones here. It doesn’t officially open until 8am. Before parking we had already seen a Coati. A quick fuel stop for some fresh coffee from a thermos (espresso style) and some juice from our packed breakfasts and we head onwards.

Before we leave the car park we see a [great kiskadee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_kiskadee) flycatcher and a [gartered trogon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gartered_trogon). In the park, but still only heading to the main paths, we immediately see a female [great curassow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_curassow), which is roughly the size of a peacock and was nonchalantly walking across the path ahead of us. Apparently they don’t bother flying unless they really have to, or to roost. Then another bird, a [crested guan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crested_guan). At 6am our viewing has started very well.

It is apparent that I’ve been very lucky with our driver. Jason says he has never met a driver like this, most of the others are not really interested but Yuedy has an innate talent for spotting and is genuinely interested and excited about wildlife. I feel like I have two guides. Yuedy doesn’t speak english very well and is a bit shy but Jason explains the names to him in English and Yuedy is clearly trying to learn the Spanish and English names for the things he spots. It is clear that these two get along really well and have a lovely jokey relationship and it is a bit of a shame that I don’t speak Spanish as I think it would be quite entertaining to understand their banter.

### Birds on the hanging bridges

The hanging bridges are a circular walk including solid bridges and then hanging ones, that gradually get higher without you really noticing, it's about 2 miles total.

We see a hill inhabited entirely by termites and we see lots of birds. The first _big_ bird we see is ahead of us perching on a handrail post, it's a [rufous motmot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rufous_motmot), the first of many wonderful motmots. I’m still trying to work out the appropriate settings for the 400mm lens which I haven’t really used before so most of the pictures are just vague blurs. Behind us we see a [broad-billed motmot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Broad-billed_motmot) and a [rufous tailed hummingbird](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rufous-tailed_hummingbird).

Jason has a quick go with the 400mm and realises just how hard it is! Throughout the visit I see many motmots, mostly of the two common ones for this area, but quite early on we also see the [keel-billed motmot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keel-billed_motmot), with a blue eyebrow. I’m not really fast enough with the camera to capture it, but I did get one snap before it flew away. Its colours aren’t nearly as ostentatious as the other motmot varieties but it has a subtle elegance to it that I really like.

I had problems with a lot of my motmot pictures, they’re slightly out of focus, or perhaps it was just that they were noisy and I didn’t think to reduce the ISO. Anyway, the lighting wasn’t perfect, it was very dark, and I kept cursing myself for not bringing the tripod. When I left that morning I figured I couldn’t carry it as well as the two cameras and two big lenses. Once I had the cameras round my neck I practically had nothing in my rucksack so could have probably taken the extra weight. I also didn’t expect to have two strapping young men to help me who could have easily carried my tripod for for me. Unfortunately the tripod for the scope didn’t match the fittings for my tripod attachment. Annoyingly, Jason’s other scope probably would have been compatible. Never mind, you live and learn.

Inside the park there are less opportunities to see mammals, but there are so many birds. We get to the highest hanging bridge, which is the first one that really freaks me out (from a vertigo point of view), it wobbles like crazy. I wait for the people just ahead of us to move off the bridge before getting on, but what they were looking at standing in the middle of the bridge was a family of howler monkeys. They are beautiful. Once I get Yuedy to stop moving and wobbling the bridge, I manage to get a shot of mother and baby looking straight at me. We move on around the corner and get a different view, of the family, but unfortunately the light isn’t quite right for good photos. As we move on Jason, points out how high I was and congratulates me for conquering my fears. I take a picture from below, just to prove how high I went – such a brave girl.

PICTURE.

### Heading back

And soon it is over, way too quick. I see another broad-billed motmot and I’m determined, this time I’m gonna get it. I keep trying again again, keep thinking I’ve got it. The others go ahead and sit down for a moment. I give up. Whilst I am looking I point it out to a few american tourists that are now catching us up. Jason asks if I want a rest and I answer no and he thinks I am a ‘strong girl’, well really I just want to enjoy it and once you sit down it is hard to get up again. Before we leave, I decide I am gonna give it one more go to no avail.

So we carry on. Just as we are approaching the bridge there is a huge queue of others in front of us and we decide not to bother waiting and just go around. The tour guide for the large American group lets us go ahead of them on the bridge, so I get to enjoy the last and longest hanging bridge and before I am ready, it is over and 3 hours have gone just like that. It was fantastic. Jason and Yeudy were both very good spotters and I’ve had a lovely morning. I try and take some pictures of the volcano vista but the sun is now too bright for a good shot. I ask if we have time for the souvenir shop but we have to go. I’m not that bothered and we spend the minibus trip back looking through Jason’s rather large book of birds of Costa Rica. Talking about what we have seen today and taking pictures of the relevant pages for each bird we have seen both picture and info including their distribution. Jason said he used to be a good birder and write down where he first had a sighting of bird, but he had got through 4 copies of his book now as they keep getting wet! He is shocked that the distribution of one of the birds is slightly different to what he thought and he realises that the second edition is slightly different. I’m really happy with the _bandana birds_ and there is a few that he isn’t sure which of two particular bird we saw but perhaps it was the rarer one from the body shape. And no I don’t count my birds, which maybe I should?

We don’t see much on the way back as it is now really bright and warmed up. I quiz Jason about how best to use tomorrow and I have several plans depending on how well Paul is. I get back and try to call Paul whilst Jason is still there but Paul isn’t up to leaving the room just yet. Jason leaves and I hope that Paul and I will be able to take a trip with him tomorrow.

Birds:
* Great Curassow (female)
* Black Vulture
* Turkey Vulture
* Crested Guan
* Bronze-tailed Plumeleteer - Hummingbird
* Gartered tailed trogon female
* Black throated trogon female
* Keel-billed Motmot
* Broad-billed Motmot
* Rufous Motmot
* Black Mandibled Toucan
* Buff-throated foliage-gleaner
* Great Kiskadee
* Boat-billed flycatcher
* White collarded Manakin (male)
* White throated Magpie-Jay
* Black headed Nightingale Thrush
* Wood Thrush or Swainson’s Thrush
* Melodious Blackbird
* Clay-coloured Thrush

Mammals:
* White-nosed Coati
* Family of Howler monkeys

## Break between trips

Having spent some time talking with Jason about how best to spend the next day we arrived back at the hotel I call through to Paul at the reception to see if he could come and see what he wanted to do tomorrow but it was soon clear he wasn't better. I said my goodbyes and headed back to the room, Paul was still really sick. But less said about that the better. I tried not to be too excited about what I had just seen and showed Paul my pictures. It became clear that he wouldn't be going out this afternoon. We tried having some lunch I had some yummy enchiladas, Paul tested some chips and cola, that did more harm than good.

## Volcano tour and hot springs

And so the ecole travel trip volcano tour and hot springs. I was first on the bus and explained that it would just be me. Marcus was driving and Andy was the guide, quick to pick up my name as it was the same as his daughters.  He seemed to pick on me throughout our tour, but I think cause it was the only name he could remember.

The first pick up was to collect our friends from yesterday, Peter and Karen the architect and nurse from Sweden who we had enjoyed chatting on the interbus yesterday. Next was a retired English couple from Worthing! Even crazier the wife had lived in Weybridge until she was 9 and went to school in Walton on Thames! Isn’t the world small.  Next on the bus was Robin a lovely lady from the USA who had lived in lots of places America and had gone to college in an American University in the London and had lived in Croydon. Her opening gambit was that she was an American who wanted to live anywhere but America. She was seriously considering moving to Costa Rica once she retired early in about 10 years. She would be coming again to Costa Rica with her best friend, her husband and their 4 year old later in the year to taste another area of Costa Rica to see how she liked it.

Soon the bus was full and we arrived at the Volcano (?Arunel).  We picked up our walking sticks and we were off up the path made by the 1974 eruption that killed 100 people. A small grave (the only remaining from the church that stood within the village that is no longer there) as a reminder of the lost which is commemorated annually by the local people.

We continued on through the secondary forest which is reasonably barren compared to other forests we have visited throughout our trip. Of course it is only what has grown again since the last eruption which relies entirely on a moss that grows, allowing further vegetation is spring up.

See picture of moss.

As the vegetation is limited so is the animal life and I saw very few birds, baring some turkey vultures on this walk. However we did see some lovely flowers and planted agriculture which felt like they have been planted so that Andy could introduce us to the local produce and plants.  Pineapples, bananas, sugar cane and liquorice plant ?????, were among them.  We got to an old looking large object Andy said he would sort we won't be able to guess what it was. Silence, what do you think it is Samantha. Still silence, I'll give you $100 if you can guess, I'll give you $200, $500. All guesses are wrong. It is a piece of a Will Smith’s  spacecraft in a film ‘After Earth’ which has been kept for posterity. Robin and I joked how easy it would be to tell someone on his next tour and split the money. Don’t worry we are not that mean and if you are about to go on this tour - please don’t play this guy - although I doubt he would pay up anyway!

The walk was reasonably uneventful but quite steep. Andy tried to engage with us but there really is limit of wildlife to talk to us about. The view once we got to the summit of 1974 lava flow was beautiful. A 360 view takes in the volcano (which was visible, apparently quite a rarity), a very large man-made Lake which I assumed was formed after the volcano erupted. Apparently this isn't so and actually the village was flooded to form this lake however it does provide hydroelectric energy for a large proportion of Costa Rica and is very beautiful.  I’m not sure if the dam is such as great idea as it was expected to take 10% of the water to provide energy however only 10% remains and all the fish and associated fish migratory patterns are now gone, so even in an eco-friendly country mistakes can happen.

Panorama view of volcano and lake.

Anyway I digress, we continued the walk down, myself and retired couple from Worthing lagging behind is Andy didn't seem to want to wait for us and our photography.  We walked through a field of query query??  that seemed to make ???  look like a borrower in a grain field.

Picture.

We return to the van and I was slightly disappointed about the tour however I had enjoyed the company.  We continued on to the hot springs, Eco Termales which felt like a really lovely spa /swimming pool. We dropped off a couple at a swanky looking spa first. I later found out that this cost an extra $50, and is much more crowded.  I was glad we did not upgrade especially as it was only me (and not Paul) that ended up going. Towels and wristband were provided to enable us to buy drinks and cocktails spa side.

As I was severely sunburnt I was very cautious about going in. My new friends assured me that it would help. However when they saw my back once I was in my bikini they really understood what I meant. It would be the cold pool for me, which in itself was very cooling to for my sunburn.  The others wandered off to the different temperature pools and I wandered over to chat to Robin, whilst she enjoyed a glass of white wine. Soon she wanted to be back in the pool so I sat on the steps and with two feet and an ankle in the water -  I was pleased to achieved this and was happy. After short while I decided to get a cocktail and found the others in our group doing the same. Whilst ordering my mojito I was again surprised Costa Rican people had heard of Brighton football club.

Our drinks finished and we ventured again into the pool and this time I was braver, first just getting in upto my waist, then sitting on the side with my legs dangling in and eventually in entirely. Whooo! I was in and it was lovely. I ventured to all the different pools of varying temperatures, at least poking my foot in them all.  What a lovely relaxing way to spend the afternoon with some new found friends.

The six of us then enjoyed a lovely buffet dinner together, myself and Robin indulging in a glass of wine and whilst Peter and Karen enjoyed their coffees (they had got a head start on dinner) and the couple from Worthing.  It was nice to spend time with all of them.
