title: 'La Fortuna, Costa Rica'
subtitle: 'A frog night tour'
date: 2016-03-08
pages: 3
page: 3
---

 And so my first day without out Paul by my side finished.  I hoped that this would be a one day only blog spot but it would be 3 days until Paul was back up and doing activities properly. I returned from the hot springs and it was clear that he wasn’t feeling well and hadn’t booked any further activities for the next day, he slept and I wound down, reviewing my pictures from the afternoon and surfing the net in the lobby. We would see how he felt tomorrow.  Not much better, it seemed.  I chilled out at the pool and booked a night walk for the evening in the hope that he would be better by then, but he was not.

A test walk just around the grounds by the river showed he still didn’t have much energy.  Once I was on the the super bumpy ride to my night tour, I realised he probably wouldn’t have even coped with the 20 minute ride and that he wasn’t ready to continue with his holiday just yet.

Luckily another couple had booked on the natural night tour and therefore I was able to do the tour which as usual had a one person minimum. I was joined by an American couple Susan and Mikael. Mikael originally from Argentina, his Spanish came in handy later and his wife who had both worked for Gillett and had frequently visited the factory in Isleworth with the famous gillett clock that had been such an important sound of my childhood at my grandma's.

I was guided this time by Mirlliana and once again I had Juedy, the same driver as yesterday, who true to form spotted a bird high up in the tree [Crested Caracara, check audio] (?????) and also a sloth on the way to our night tour.  We we were able to get out and view. The couple didn't get the idea of photography but were nice company.

We arrived at Casa Méndez, the family home of Otto, his wife Mary and his children. Otto is a landscape architect and had converted his land into a haven for frogs after a friend took a photo of a frog on his land and ended up winning a photography competition.  He saw the potential and promptly converted his land, which he had previously used for farming ornamental plants in much the same way the rest of the village does (the La Tigra’s speciality is ornamental plants, it was name is a misnomer - tigers have never been here).  Otto decided he wanted to invite tourists to his property but had wanted to do it the right way, so had decided only to offer tours to one company and thus limit the number of people tramping through his property and disturbing all 22 varieties of frog that are native to this area. The whole family was involved in the business, his wife providing welcoming drinks (gala melon for us), a full dinner after our walk and being mostly responsible for the beautiful homemade recycled art, jewelry and photography postcards that they sold in their cute little shop.  I was very happy to support the business and came away with quite a few lovely pieces.

Anyway back to the night tour.  Oslo first started off with us, explaining in spanish to Mikel how he set up the place, which Mikel and the guide were only to happy to translate for me.  

Our driver as ever was an amazing spotting, I think seeing all four of the Blue Jeans frogs first, strange apparently as they are day frogs. I was super super excited, thinking that it would have been great to see this frog but never expecting to see it at all let alone four!  Juedy like an overexcited child and after hearing a cane toad was practically lying down on the floor to find it - it was hiding under a bridge but significantly larger than the others we saw.  His english was much better than it appeared yesterday, and I think he is just shy in front of other Costa Ricans he thinks speak better English.  He enquired about Paul which was very nice of him. His cheeky nature came out as we came to more of a clearing and there were two odd shaped square shaped metal things in the floor.  He joked we had to go through to go one, game for a laugh I crawled through, only to find out later it was the remains of an ancient latrine (fortunately hadn’t been used for years!).  Well that got everyone laughing at dinner to say the least.

As we came around the corner we could see the vista, the lights of the valleys of San Carlos and I noticed how little light pollution there was.  Also that nearly all the way around his path were beautiful leaf shaped concrete stepping stones.  I enquired how it had been done and he went to show me his template which was all handmade and designed to be the copy of a real leaf - all his own idea.  

Pic of template

This man is one who thinks about the details, he explained to us that the alignment of the tiles encouraged the eyes to look at the view.  It emerged through dinner that he was the landscape architect who was responsible for the gardens at La Luna, and I proceeded to ask all about it.  He proudly informed me that the space had been entirely flat when he has got it and that now all the water features all flowed to the river at the bottom of the site.  The ‘natural’ river walk however had been designed by the owner who had planted all the trees he liked best.  

I had a lovely evening with this welcoming Costa Rican family, guide, driver and American family. Swapping culture and experiences.  

Our dinner was:

Starter: Soup, mixed vegetable
Main: Slow cooked tasty chicken in a delicious sauce served with beans and rice, and mashed either Camote (or Yucca) which was lovely and creamy mash along with a tomato salad
Dessert: Sour guava Jelly
Yummy drink: Australian Guava - ??Araza fruit.

Dinner Picture

We saw:

Common Dink frog
Cane toad
Other toad, /frog
Emerld Balisk / Jesus Christ Lizard
Strawberry frog, otherwise known as Blue jeans frog
??black river turtle??
Large cane toad
Gaudy leaf frog - 2-3 in one area.


I got back to find Paul had found a good film to watch about Luther King - Selma, so he wasn’t too unhappy.  I showed him some pictures and he was very jealous to hear I had seen the blue jeans frog.  I have realised how much I enjoyed this tour and how fascinating frogs are - there was a leaflet for SAVE the FROGs - I think I might sponsor them for a year.  Frogs really are a great indicator for the healthiness of an habitat.

We had earlier in the day changed our transfer from a interbus by road at 8.15 to a bus, boat, bus transfer that left at 1.15pm.  This gave us a little more time for Paul to be better and gave him the opportunity for a little sightseeing on the boat on the way, and maybe a less horrible journey to endure whilst still feeling not quite right.  This left me with some time to enjoy a morning walk through the river side walk, taking pictures of the birds, howler monkey and flowers.   was too late to the pool to take a swim before breakfast but enjoyed one afterwards, and found the jacuzzi that Otto had been talking about the night before.  They are beautiful and secluded but if you didn’t know they were there you could surely miss them entirely!

I had booked a reflexology treatment and chocolate wrap as a treat.  My sunburnt back wasn’t yet up to a massage but the aloe wrap worked wonders.  It was a relaxing hour and 15 and with a heavy heart I got onto the bus to Monteverde.  On the bus I realised that Paul hadn’t left the hotel at all and was disappointed for him. The journey was nicely split up though and he made it through the journey better than we expected even taking a hyperlapse video or two. We managed to get the mini bus after the boat with the noisiest girls in the whole group of 30 or so on the boat, so we enjoyed music whilst watching the views. After a pit stop (and an ice cream for me) the Welsh girl next to us struck up a conversations and her story of the last 5 weeks at a rescue centre came out along with university choices and interviews etc. oh to be 19 again.  Another girl, also volunteering at the centre was British as well although she had grown up in Cyprus only attending university in the UK.  They had made friends with an American pair in La Fortuna and were heading to a hostel with her hammock chair thing that was debatably a personal carry on item for the plane, or so she hoped.

We that’s me folks, over to Paul. Normal service has resumed.
