title: 'Mkhuze, South Africa'
subtitle: '2 nights in St Lucia'
date: 2016-10-10
pages: 9
page: 6
---

## 2 nights in St Lucia

In St Lucia I met up with Philippine, Feline and Jannes again, the old iMfolozi posse. We were joined too by Melanie, from New York state. We were staying at Monzis Safari’s tented lodge, in backpacker accommodation – a permanent tent, a nightlight and a comfortable bed; its pitched on the roof above the shower block. I was bunking with Jannes again, just like old times.

There are two pools, a pool table, two kitchens and not much else; we didn’t use the pools, it was too cold during our stay, and we would have liked a bar; but maybe buying our own beers turned out cheaper, eh? For lunch we satisfied our biggest cravings, at Reef & Dune we ate pizza and drunk milkshakes. My first pizza in 5 weeks. So good.  We played some pool to while away the evening, though it was more _teaching_ pool than playing pool, ahem. I turned in an early night, not hungry while the others went for sushi.

St Lucia offers lots of activities; like whale watching, bird watching, boat tours, horse riding, snorkelling and so on. These options are greatly reduced when its windy, and when it rains. We cancelled plans to see whales and swim and we all joined Philippine on her trip to the beach, to go horse riding in the rain – her event was still going ahead.

After a tasty breakfast at [kauai](http://www.kauai.co.za/), we left for the beach. It takes about half an hour to walk there. We passed hippo warning signs – it’s dangerous to walk at night here, hippos come out from the lake and wander the empty streets – if they see you they’ll charge you and you’ll need to climb a tree.

The beach I was expecting was a tourist one; one with a few shops, a promenade, maybe a coffee shop. This isn’t the case – it’s a beach in a reserve, it’s pristine, save for all the garbage that gets washed up. The only buildings are toilets. This means there’s no shelter from the rain, and nowhere to grab coffee.

Philippine’s horse was a little skinny,  but it was better than the horse with one eye. We watched her ride into the distance, then we meandered up and down the beach, watching the crashing waves, the swirling storm clouds above and the scuttling crabs; we’d only need to wait an hour, the clouds passed and the sun came out.

At Braza we had lunch; souvlaki and cocktails, and downstairs we bought Beleave t-shirts – a perfect [wild dog shirt](https://beleave.co.za/product/mens-wild-dog-grey/) not in my size.
