title: 'The Great Escape 2012'
date: 2012-06-10 00:33:07
pages: 4
page: 4
---

As you might expect, Sunday was a muted experience. We had a full English breakfast and coffee to recover. Luckily the TV had a healthy sport lineup. The Spanish Grand prix followed by the finale to the Premier League season.

Sarah and Sam nipped out to look at some of the nearby artist open houses, but returned quickly needing the loo. Mark and I watched the grand prix, as Hamilton fought his way up the leader board, and as Alonso chased first place but ultimately failed. Williams got their first, much needed, win in four years.

And then we caught the football action with Gabby on football focus. Man City and Man United were vying to be champions; equal on points but Man City ahead on goal difference. QPR and Bolton were fighting to avoid relegation, QPR playing Man City being the choice fixture. What a day of football. The QPR match was intense, with Man United winning, Man City needed to beat QPR, it looked good, 1-0 up at half time, until Cisse got an equaliser, Joey Barton got sent off and Mackie then, surprisingly, put QPR ahead. Man City fans had their heads in their hands, United's were cheering.

2-1 down, the clock turned to the 90th minute. Man City were down and out and United's game finished. 4 minutes of added time. In the 92nd minute Dzeko equalised. Some hope at least. In the 94th minute Ballotelli poked the ball through to Aguero who slotted home, with almost the last kick of the season Man City beat QPR to win the league. Exhilarating, I relived the drama on match of the day. Pure unadulterated sporting drama.
