title: 'Tembe Elephant Park, South Africa'
subtitle: 'Successful wild dog call-ups'
date: 2016-09-26
pages: 6
page: 6
---

## Day 13 - Successful call-ups

This morning, our last full day, we returned immediately to where we’d left the nyala leg. We had no fresh bait today. The leg was still chained to the tree, seemingly untouched, but fresh elephant and dog tracks were here too, over our truck’s tracks from last night. Hayden wondered whether the “ele”s had scared ’em off. We reverse away from the leg and set up the speakers, while Joris scans. A little twitter rings out, then we wait. Like before, they seemed closer, beeps were louder. We edge forward for a better view.

And there they were. The dogs, at long last, the 3 escapees – Elsa, Finn and Poofie, no sign of the puppy. At last a confirmed visual, after days of effort we could begin. When they saw us they looked to run; we reversed back, waited, and played the audio again. They returned to the meat, to finish their abandoned meal. While one fed the others were moving, always looking around, checking their surroundings. We edge closer, they skip away, we wait, they come back again, we repeat the process – each time getting closer, each time the dogs growing more accustomed to the presence of us and the truck.

### Courtship at camp, kudu burgers at the lodge

From the kitchen I heard a peculiar clicking and clucking noise, and the odd _whirrrr_. I traced the noise to a shrub outside. Peering in, I could see a bird sitting patiently on a branch, beneath her, another, a male – he danced heroically, clicking, whizzing and bouncing from tree to tree, trying to woo and impress her. They were green-backed cameraopteras, a pleasure to watch, though he wasn’t successful.

It was around now that Peter and I also started the great plover debate. How do you pronounce plover? Is it plover – like lover, or plover, like clover. Turns out we aren’t the only ones, and a quick Google revealed the same arguments online. We agreed to a British way and an American way on the way to the lodge for lunch.

Hayden had told us all about the kudu burgers; this was our last chance to try one. We booked a table for 6 and each of us had an accompanying milkshake. Samanga monkeys, crested guineafowl and nyala hung around the restaurant.

### Another success

After eating antelope ourselves, we left for another call-up session, a leg of frozen nyala bait in the back. On arrival we found their signal had moved, they weren’t near the crossroads, they’d headed further west, to the perimeter. On the border road we drive fast, passing herds of feeding elephants, closing down on the dog’s signal. We slow for a newtonia tree in the road, and stop to scan again.

Lynn scans, the signal is strong, 11, 12 o’clock she says. We look ahead, along the road, and here they are, coming our way. We drive towards them and they scatter into the grass, but they don’t go far, they’re watching us. Now for one of Hayden’s tricks; he asks Lindsey to watch them, to make eye contact with them, and while they’re watching, to drop the leg from the truck. The dogs know the meat came from us. We reverse and wait.

Cautiously they move-in, they grab the leg and drag it to a safer place. We follow them, taking the truck off road, over grass, bumps and rocks, to get close to them. We continue the habituation, keeping close, making them comfortable. Hayden revs the engine a little, a noise they shouldn’t be afraid of. We watch them feed, and in the long grass we have a photo opportunity; it was idyllic just watching them, in the dimming evening, our time in Tembe coming to an end.

We had to drive back along the border fence to get home. Some of those elephants we’d sped past were now much closer, one fed from a tree right besides the road. We needed to pass, this could be awkward. She was small… ish, and nervous. We move closer, carefully creeping forward, she’s not happy – she pulls back, lifts her leg and flaps her ears. We wait, unsure what she’ll do, wary of alarming her more. Then we creep closer still, trying to squeeze past, all of us silent. We’re almost clear, and she lets out a poot from her trumpet, but we’re clear now, and heading into the distance, hearts palpitating.

## Day 14 - A final feeding


## Species spotted

### Mammals
* Lion – male, female, cubs
* Elephant – tusker
* Zebra
* Giraffe
* Slender mongoose
* Banded mongoose
* Vervet monkey
* Samanga monkey
* African wild dog, painted dog, puppy
* Wildebeest
* Impala
* Nyala
* Kudu
* Reedbuck
* Red duiker
* Grey duiker
* Buffalo

### Birds
* African fish eagle
* African stonechat
* African yellow white-eye
* Bateleur
* Black-bellied bustard
* Black-chested snake eagle
* Burchell’s coucal
* Cinnamon-breasted bunting
* Collared sunbird
* Crested francolin (sound)
* Crowned eagle
* Eastern nicator
* Egyptian goose
* Green (red-billed) wood-hoopoe
* Grey heron
* Hamerkop
* Lilac-breasted roller
* Little bee-eater
* Little sparrowhawk
* Long-crested eagle
* Marico sunbird
* Purple-crested turaco
* Red-billed oxpecker
* Southern banded snake eagle
* Southern black flycatcher
* White-bellied sunbird
* Woolly-necked stork
* Yellow-bellied greenbul
* Yellow-billed kite
* Yellow-throated longclaw

### Other
* Hingeback tortoise
* Rock monitor lizard
* Assassin bug nymph
* Flattened giant dung beetle
* Orange spider
* Rock python
* Thread snake
* Worm snake
* Lapwing and eggs
* Robberfly
* Heady maiden – Black winged bug with red stripes
* Orthoptern – common red-leg grasshopper
* Potter wasp
* Grass hoppers
* Garden acraea
* Black spider at hide
* Swallowtail butterfly
* Orange-tipped butterfly
* Black butterfly with four prominent white dots
* Misc queen ant, giant
* Velvet ant wasp
